README.rst, before:

Project Description
===================

``hep-mc`` is a C++ library for `Monte Carlo integration
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monte_Carlo_integration>`_. The following integration algorithms are
implemented:

- PLAIN (naive Monte Carlo integration),
- `VEGAS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VEGAS_algorithm>`_ [1]_ [2]_, and
- MULTI CHANNEL with adaptive weight optimization [3]_.

Features
========

- **Parallelization**: For each integrator a function prefixed with ``mpi_`` is available that uses
  the `Message Passing Interface (MPI) <http://www.mpi-forum.org/>`_ to run the integration in
  parallel. The parallel integration is designed so that the functions return the numerically same
  result as their non-parallel counterpart. This means that the result is independent from the
  number of processors and only dependend on the seed of the random number generator. The parallel
  integrators divide the work equally among all processors and use ``MPI_Accumulate`` to exchange
  data after each iteration.
- **Distributions**: Arbitrarily many differential distributions can be generated during the
  integration (see below). This feature can also be used to integrate many integrands in the same
  run.
- **Intermediate results**: Callback functions can be used to print intermediate results as soon as
  they are available. After the integration is finished each intermediate result can be extracted
  separately if the automatically weighted average does not suit the user.
- **Checkpointing system**: A checkpoint allows to convert the state of an integrator into a textual
  format, which can, for example, be written into a file. The checkpoint contains the complete
  information neccessary to restart an integration seemlessly: The result of the restarted
  integration does not depend where the checkpoint was created, only on the integration parameters
  (iterations, calls, seed). This is useful, for example, when an integration takes very long and
  one has to work around resource limitations of a computer cluster. In this case one can leverage
  the maximum run time of the cluster and save a checkpoint, restart from the checkpoint and run
  again for the maximum run time, and so on and so forth, until the integration yields satisfactory
  results.
- **Random numbers**: Random numbers are generated using the C++ standard library `random
  <http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/random>`_. This library offers many random number
  generators from which the user can choose. If no random number generator is explicitly requested a
  Mersennne twister (MT19937) is used.
- **Numeric Types**: All functions are templates in order to support all floating point types of
  C++, i.e. ``float``, ``double``, and ``long double``. Kahan summation is used to prevent loss of
  numerical accuracy in long-running integrations.

Showcase
========

The following (LO) differential distribution was generated using the MULTI CHANNEL integrator from
``hep-mc`` running with 200 processors on the `NEMO cluster <https://www.hpc.uni-freiburg.de/nemo>`_
for about 30 hours, for 50 iterations each calling the integrand 1'000'000'000 times. The plot
itself was generated with `matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/>`_.

.. image:: doc/ptj1.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 80%

The integrands are matrix elements from `OpenLoops <https://openloops.hepforge.org/>`_ describing
the scattering of W and Z bosons. The generated distribution describes the transverse momentum of
the leading jet. For more plots see `arXiv:1904.00882 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.00882>`_.

Usage
=====

This library uses features from the ISO C++11 standard which must be enabled with your compiler. For
the GCC and clang compilers this can be done by passing an additional parameter to the compiler,
for example ::

    g++ -std=c++11 my_program.cpp

The inclusion of the main header, ::

    #include <hep/mc.hpp>

is sufficient to use it; you do not need to link against a library. If you intend to use the MPI
variants of the integrators include ::

    #include <hep/mc-mpi.hpp>

instead. To see the library in action take a look at the example programs in the `examples
directory`_.

Documentation and Examples
==========================

Documentation is available online at http://cschwan.github.io/hep-mc and can be generated from
sources (see Installation_). The examples can be viewed from within the documentation.

Installation
============

The easiest way to use this library is to just download it from the `releases page`_ and point your
compiler to the `include directory`_ - there is no library that needs to be compiled.

If you want to automatically compile the example programs, generate the documentation, and/or
install the headers you have to use `meson <http://mesonbuild.com/>`_ to build ``hep-mc``. If meson
is installed type ::

    meson build
    cd build

to generate the build files in the directory ``build`` and to enter it. Before you build you can
select a few options:

1. To enable building the examples, type ::

       meson configure -Dexamples=true

   in the build directory.

2. To enable tests and more examples that depend on MPI, enter ::

       meson configure -Dmpi=true

3. The `Doxygen <http://doxygen.org/>`_ documentation can be enabled with ::

       meson configure -Ddoxygen=true

   which creates a documentation of all classes and functions in the ``doc/html`` directory.

4. More options are shown when entering ::

       meson configure

   which will display all options (including install paths) that can be changed by using the syntax
   ``-Doption-name=value`` as used above.

To finally build everything type ::

    ninja

and/or ::

    ninja install

to install the headers.

Support
=======

If you spot a problem or a bug, or if you have a feature request, please use the Issues page to let
me know. If you have any question concerning this library don't hesitate to write an `email to me
<christopher.schwan@mi.infn.it>`_. If you prefix your subject line with a ``[hep-mc]`` you'll
increase the chance of getting an answer quickly :).

Name
====

The ``hep`` in the project name stands for high-energy physics (see the showcase above), which is
the area in which I use this library myself, but in fact it is completely general in terms of
applications. Unfortunately, when I named this library, I wasn't aware of another project with a
similar name: `HepMC <http://hepmc.web.cern.ch/hepmc>`_.

Similar Libraries
=================

A few other libraries offering Monte Carlo integration routines are:

- `BOOST <https://www.boost.org>`_
- `CUBA <http://www.feynarts.de/cuba>`_
- `DVEGAS <https://dvegas.hepforge.org>`_
- `GSL <https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl>`_

References
==========

.. [1] G. P. Lepage. "A New Algorithm for Adaptive Multidimensional
       Integration". J. of Comp. Phys. 27 (1978), pp. 192-203. DOI:
       `10.1016/0021-9991(78)90004-9
       <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991(78)90004-9>`_.

.. [2] G.P. Lepage. "VEGAS: An Adaptive Multi-dimensional Integration Program".
       Cornell preprint CLNS 80-447 (1980).

.. [3] R. Kleiss, R. Pittau. "Weight optimization in multichannel Monte Carlo".
       Comp. Phys. Commun. 83 (1994), pp. 141-146. DOI:
       `10.1016/0010-4655(94)90043-4
       <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0010-4655(94)90043-4>`_. arXiv:
       `hep-ph/9405257 <http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9405257>`_.

.. _releases page: http://github.com/cschwan/hep-mc/releases
.. _include directory: http://github.com/cschwan/hep-mc/tree/master/include
.. _examples directory: http://github.com/cschwan/hep-mc/tree/master/examples

Commit message:

Document fork purpose and additions

README.rst, after:

Project Description
===================

``hep-mc`` is a C++ library for `Monte Carlo integration
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monte_Carlo_integration>`_. The following integration algorithms are
implemented:

- PLAIN (naive Monte Carlo integration),
- `VEGAS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VEGAS_algorithm>`_ [1]_ [2]_, and
- MULTI CHANNEL with adaptive weight optimization [3]_.

Fork status
===========

- This repository is a fork of `cschwan/hep-mc <https://github.com/cschwan/hep-mc>`_ kept under the
  original GPL-3.0 license.
- Modified and extended for MonteCarloSimulator benchmarking by apurvakreddy (2024).
- Additions include a plain numerical integration example
  (``examples/numerical_integration_plain.cpp``) and vendored test support
  (``subprojects/Catch2-2.5.0`` and ``subprojects/packagecache``).
  All changes are provided under the same GPL-3.0 terms.

Features
========

- **Parallelization**: For each integrator a function prefixed with ``mpi_`` is available that uses
  the `Message Passing Interface (MPI) <http://www.mpi-forum.org/>`_ to run the integration in
  parallel. The parallel integration is designed so that the functions return the numerically same
  result as their non-parallel counterpart. This means that the result is independent from the
  number of processors and only dependend on the seed of the random number generator. The parallel
  integrators divide the work equally among all processors and use ``MPI_Accumulate`` to exchange
  data after each iteration.
- **Distributions**: Arbitrarily many differential distributions can be generated during the
  integration (see below). This feature can also be used to integrate many integrands in the same
  run.
- **Intermediate results**: Callback functions can be used to print intermediate results as soon as
  they are available. After the integration is finished each intermediate result can be extracted
  separately if the automatically weighted average does not suit the user.
- **Checkpointing system**: A checkpoint allows to convert the state of an integrator into a textual
  format, which can, for example, be written into a file. The checkpoint contains the complete
  information neccessary to restart an integration seemlessly: The result of the restarted
  integration does not depend where the checkpoint was created, only on the integration parameters
  (iterations, calls, seed). This is useful, for example, when an integration takes very long and
  one has to work around resource limitations of a computer cluster. In this case one can leverage
  the maximum run time of the cluster and save a checkpoint, restart from the checkpoint and run
  again for the maximum run time, and so on and so forth, until the integration yields satisfactory
  results.
- **Random numbers**: Random numbers are generated using the C++ standard library `random
  <http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/random>`_. This library offers many random number
  generators from which the user can choose. If no random number generator is explicitly requested a
  Mersennne twister (MT19937) is used.
- **Numeric Types**: All functions are templates in order to support all floating point types of
  C++, i.e. ``float``, ``double``, and ``long double``. Kahan summation is used to prevent loss of
  numerical accuracy in long-running integrations.

Showcase
========

The following (LO) differential distribution was generated using the MULTI CHANNEL integrator from
``hep-mc`` running with 200 processors on the `NEMO cluster <https://www.hpc.uni-freiburg.de/nemo>`_
for about 30 hours, for 50 iterations each calling the integrand 1'000'000'000 times. The plot
itself was generated with `matplotlib <https://matplotlib.org/>`_.

.. image:: doc/ptj1.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 80%

The integrands are matrix elements from `OpenLoops <https://openloops.hepforge.org/>`_ describing
the scattering of W and Z bosons. The generated distribution describes the transverse momentum of
the leading jet. For more plots see `arXiv:1904.00882 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.00882>`_.

Usage
=====

This library uses features from the ISO C++11 standard which must be enabled with your compiler. For
the GCC and clang compilers this can be done by passing an additional parameter to the compiler,
for example ::

    g++ -std=c++11 my_program.cpp

The inclusion of the main header, ::

    #include <hep/mc.hpp>

is sufficient to use it; you do not need to link against a library. If you intend to use the MPI
variants of the integrators include ::

    #include <hep/mc-mpi.hpp>

instead. To see the library in action take a look at the example programs in the `examples
directory`_.

Documentation and Examples
==========================

Documentation is available online at http://cschwan.github.io/hep-mc and can be generated from
sources (see Installation_). The examples can be viewed from within the documentation.

Installation
============

The easiest way to use this library is to just download it from the `releases page`_ and point your
compiler to the `include directory`_ - there is no library that needs to be compiled.

If you want to automatically compile the example programs, generate the documentation, and/or
install the headers you have to use `meson <http://mesonbuild.com/>`_ to build ``hep-mc``. If meson
is installed type ::

    meson build
    cd build

to generate the build files in the directory ``build`` and to enter it. Before you build you can
select a few options:

1. To enable building the examples, type ::

       meson configure -Dexamples=true

   in the build directory.

2. To enable tests and more examples that depend on MPI, enter ::

       meson configure -Dmpi=true

3. The `Doxygen <http://doxygen.org/>`_ documentation can be enabled with ::

       meson configure -Ddoxygen=true

   which creates a documentation of all classes and functions in the ``doc/html`` directory.

4. More options are shown when entering ::

       meson configure

   which will display all options (including install paths) that can be changed by using the syntax
   ``-Doption-name=value`` as used above.

To finally build everything type ::

    ninja

and/or ::

    ninja install

to install the headers.

Support
=======

If you spot a problem or a bug, or if you have a feature request, please use the Issues page to let
me know. If you have any question concerning this library don't hesitate to write an `email to me
<christopher.schwan@mi.infn.it>`_. If you prefix your subject line with a ``[hep-mc]`` you'll
increase the chance of getting an answer quickly :).

Name
====

The ``hep`` in the project name stands for high-energy physics (see the showcase above), which is
the area in which I use this library myself, but in fact it is completely general in terms of
applications. Unfortunately, when I named this library, I wasn't aware of another project with a
similar name: `HepMC <http://hepmc.web.cern.ch/hepmc>`_.

Similar Libraries
=================

A few other libraries offering Monte Carlo integration routines are:

- `BOOST <https://www.boost.org>`_
- `CUBA <http://www.feynarts.de/cuba>`_
- `DVEGAS <https://dvegas.hepforge.org>`_
- `GSL <https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl>`_

References
==========

.. [1] G. P. Lepage. "A New Algorithm for Adaptive Multidimensional
       Integration". J. of Comp. Phys. 27 (1978), pp. 192-203. DOI:
       `10.1016/0021-9991(78)90004-9
       <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991(78)90004-9>`_.

.. [2] G.P. Lepage. "VEGAS: An Adaptive Multi-dimensional Integration Program".
       Cornell preprint CLNS 80-447 (1980).

.. [3] R. Kleiss, R. Pittau. "Weight optimization in multichannel Monte Carlo".
       Comp. Phys. Commun. 83 (1994), pp. 141-146. DOI:
       `10.1016/0010-4655(94)90043-4
       <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0010-4655(94)90043-4>`_. arXiv:
       `hep-ph/9405257 <http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9405257>`_.

.. _releases page: http://github.com/cschwan/hep-mc/releases
.. _include directory: http://github.com/cschwan/hep-mc/tree/master/include
.. _examples directory: http://github.com/cschwan/hep-mc/tree/master/examples
